Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined for a third time by Doctor
Menelausa Postolo. Uh, I'm, I'm leaving the link, the
links to our first two interviews in the description
down below. And today we're going to talk about
singlehood from an evolutionary perspective. So, Doctor Apostolo, welcome
back to the show. It's always a pleasure to
everyone.
Hello, uh, and very nice to see you again.
Um, AND I guess this is like I know
of a topic singlehood, uh, uh, that's like, um.
Uh, YOU know, a lot of people, uh, are,
are going to be interested in this. Um, ONE
reason is that, uh, everybody, um, is born single,
right, so, uh, sure, yes, it's kind of, it's
a phenomenon that everybody experiences, it's not like, uh,
uh, me, you or, uh, so everybody has at
least some experience of this. Mhm.
Yes, and, and so just to introduce the topic,
how do you approach singlehood from an evolutionary perspective
specifically?
Yeah, so, uh, mainly I approach everything from an
evolutionary perspective, everything related to human behavior. Uh, SO
the reason being that, um, uh, human behavior comes
from the brain, uh, the brain is a product
of evolutionary, uh, processes, um, uh, so all human
behavior has an evolutionary logic. Uh, SO it doesn't
really matter if it's singlehood or something else, um,
uh, it's kind of, you know, evolution a general,
um, umbrella if you want a general theory of
understanding human behavior. Now with singlehood seems to be
a bit of a paradox because um in evolutionary
perspective, um, The nature of human behavior is mainly
to enable yourself to survive, reproduce, or help your
uh genetic relatives to do so. So it's kind
of Paradox, um sorry, singlehood because, um, well, if
it comes to reproduction, we expect that this was
uh sexually reproducing species. WOULD expect that um you
know, most people uh would get into relationships, have
children, and so on. Um, HOWEVER, a considerable proportion
of people. They are single, that is they don't
have an intimate partner. Uh, LET me also say
here is that when, that's what I mean by
singlehood because in the past they you say someone's
single, if you're not married, right? So I mean
here single, uh, you don't have an intimate partner.
And it's like a common phenomenon. So we just
try to. RESOLVE this paradox that, OK, fine. All
right, we're we're a species that um we're sexually
reproducing species, uh uh uh having an intimate relationship
is, is important for reproduction and for survival. Um,
uh, SO the question is that why so many
people are uh are single. Um, SO here we,
uh, I can discuss some. Ultimate reasons, evolutionary reasons
why this might be the case and I can
just um discuss research on the proximate reasons of
uh uh what's going on uh there. um, BUT
that's the general idea start to resolve this paradox,
uh, given that, um. Uh, IN our species kind
of important to have, uh, an intimate relationship.
Mhm. But we have both voluntary and involuntary singlehood,
right?
All right. So I would say that, I mean
if we're going to, I would just I think
that the best way to approach it uh is
uh um maybe discuss a bit more about what
it's important to to be in an intimate relationship,
to see this is why this is a paradox.
So it's kind of, so what's important. I mean
the obvious. What an evolutionary terms, uh, so the
obvious one is, uh, uh, reproduction. However, if you
start thinking about it, it might not be so
obvious because someone would say that you can have
just sex and have children, right? You don't have
to get involved into something. However, Uh, Uh, those
who have children, they will know that this is
not an easy, uh, task, right? You have to,
um, uh, spend considerable resources, um, it's like quite
prolonged, uh, investment, um, and it's kind of, uh,
it's not easy for one individual to bear. So
if you really want. To have children that survive
and reach sexual maturity, especially during human evolution, uh,
human evolution time, uh, it works best if you
create a family. Right, so it's kind of not
just like having sex and then move on, um,
just staying for with someone, uh, for a prolonged
period of time, uh, and invest in children. Uh,
SO this is like I would say the main
reason, uh, uh, that selection forces have favored a
human mind um that is interested. Uh, IN creating,
uh, uh, long-term intimate relationships. There are, um, reasons
there. So for instance, if you just have like
a partner, this is a kind of, this is
a source of support, for instance, financial emotional uh
and uh protection uh which uh are very useful,
were very useful during human evolutionary time, so there
are no social protection systems or uh. Uh, I
don't know, unemployment benefits or anything, so, uh, people
had to rely on their families. Um, SO, you
see here it's kind of Having a long intimate
relationship. Is crucial for survival and reproduction. Uh, WHICH
means that selection forces have shaped the mind to
do so, which is kind of what we observe
in general. So across society and across time, most
people would enter into such relationships. We call this
marriages. It's a human universal and eventually most people
would enter something like that. But now We observe
also that some people are not into it. Ah,
they are so called singer, right, so it's kind
of. How this paradox then could be resolved, um,
and uh I would suggest there are 3 main
reasons for this that map to the types of
singlehood you mentioned. Um, SO there are ultimately, I
mean, in evolutionary terms, there are 3 main reasons
why someone uh is single. Uh, ONE is That
If you are to successfully participate in the mating
market, um, you need some preparation, right? So it's
kind of not only in mating market, most of
the things, um, uh, most of the challenging things,
um. And singlehood gives you this kind of time
and focus to prepare. So for instance, some people
might say, I mean, in the long term mating
market things like um a good education, a good
job are valued in a partner. However, you're not
born with this, right, so it's kind of um
uh uh uh you have to focus your energy,
develop, let's say, uh, your talents, your strengths, uh,
career advancements, so it's kind of If you are
single, you can focus on doing these things, um,
so it would work I mean this kind of
way, this is profitable, um, uh, to be single
for a period of time. So it could be
like, um, I'm, I'm single for some time so
I can focus on just getting this job promotion,
uh, get this, uh, university degree, and then when
I Look better, let's say in the mating market,
I get, I, I come back. Uh, THIS is
one reason that explain uh what you said, I
mean voluntary, uh, singlehood. There is people are single
for this reason. Uh, THEY would just say, all
right, I would prefer for some time to be
single, uh, so I can, um. Develop myself. All
right, that would explain. Uh, VOLUNTARY singlehood, um, uh,
and then, um, I mean when we, uh, uh,
we do research on actually approximate now regions, I
mean what people would say why they're single, they
would say that, you know, I want to be
single to be to have freedom of, uh, uh,
choice to be able to focus on my career,
on my, um, education, to do whatever I want,
um, so this is one. Uh, uh, REGION. Um,
NOW, the other one. Is that People move between
relationships, right? So let's say I am in a
relationship for some reason uh the relationship ended and
I move to another one and take some time
to find another partner, so it's kind of uh
um between relationships single. If you want, um, now
this is common for different reasons. Um, ONE reason
is that it's not easy to find, uh, a
good match, uh, a proper partner. And why it's
not easy. Well, There are different reasons again for
this. It's like one is deception. So there's a
lot of deception in the mating market, you know,
people uh would present themselves differently than they uh
really are, um, and, uh, so it can have
like, you know, you, you are in a relationship
uh and eventually figure out this is not. Good
for you is not what you originally thought uh
it was, so you move on to the next,
um, or relates to figuring out what yourself, what
you want. So just try some people, yeah, just
try to get experiences and figuring out what's, you
know, what they want and uh uh what's best
for them so that eventually they move uh between
relationships to find the right one. Uh, COULD be
Unfortunate reasons, uh, it's like kind of uh uh
uh bad luck. Let's say your partner dies, let's
say or moves to another country, um. Um, SO
these are some of the reasons, um, that make
it a bit difficult to find the proper uh
mate and you have to move, move between relationships
which results in a in some people being single
because they are between relationships. Um, Now the third
main reason and uh I would say this is
the main one, it relates to the mismatch problem.
Uh, SO OK, so they Uh, the brain is
like has several behavioral adaptations that aim to uh.
Um, Uh, To enable individuals to increase their survival
and reproductive success. However, uh, this was like the,
what we see today is the product of a
long evolutionary process. Which means um that. Our adaptations
have evolved um to do this to increase our
reproductive and survival success or fitness um in the
ancestral environment and might not work very well in
the contemporary one if it's like different, considerably different
from, uh from the ancestral one. I think perhaps
the The best example and an obvious example you
can see is that you have some extra weight
and um and a lot of people do and
uh this comes from the fact that uh during
human evolution, food was cars so um. Our adaptation,
uh, our food intake adaptations have evolved so as
to um when you find food, uh, eat more
than you need, store the extra in fat, um,
and then next day that probably there's no food,
uh, you can use the deserves. However, this doesn't
work very well in a contemporary environment because food
is always available and cheap. There are like supermarkets
24/7. I mean, it's like, um, so that's why
a lot of people, including me, um, are suffering.
I mean we have like like more weight than
we should. Um, NOW, here comes also to mating
that we have like situations where it's kind of
um uh uh uh in the past, the mating
market was very different from what is today and
the main difference was that in the past, um
there was uh considerable control. Overm by parents. This
is called what's sometimes called arranged marriage. Um, SO
parents, uh, so when you are young, uh, when
let's say you go about 1516 or whatever, uh,
they would arrange, uh, your marriage with someone else,
um, and that would be it, um, which means
that Adaptations in relate to mate have evolved in
this context. Now in our context today, uh it
is um uh the the situation is different, that
is we have to find our mates. Um, WHICH
means that we're not, might not be ready for
this. I mean it's like a cognitive, uh, uh,
hardware, uh, might face difficulties in this talents, um,
which could result in a situation where people have
a difficult time attracting mates, uh, or keeping uh
them, um, and this gives rise to involuntary singlehood,
uh. That is people uh want to be in
a relationship, uh, but facing difficulties in attracting a
mate. So I mean if we just put together
the reasons, I would say that the kind of,
uh, I mean it's like in evolutionary analysis to
understand this, this phenomenon I would say that there
are three main reasons. It's like, and one is
um that it could be beneficial uh to stay
single for some time. Uh, THE second is that
it's difficult to um Uh, to find the right
partner, so people move between relationships and uh, the
third is the mismatch problem. It's like the contemporary
environment is different from the ancestral one, and, uh,
our adaptations might not be very, um, let's say
efficient in, uh, in dealing with the challenges of
the modern mating market resulting into people facing difficulties
in attracting a mate and then being single.
OK, so, but when it comes to the biggest
difficulties that people have or report, when it comes
to attracting mates, are there gender differences here? Is
it that uh different kinds of difficulties are reported
by men and women or not?
Um, JUST to Tell you the. Uh, THE, the
general, um, or, well, let me just summarize our
findings and I will just go to, uh, uh,
um, uh, to this, uh, differences, um, so it
says, uh, first of all, it's kind of, OK,
what is it for is the, is the theory,
right, it's like what we, how we could explain
the phenomenon. Um, BUT this doesn't mean that it's
necessarily true, right? So, um, let's go to the
empirical now evidence and because this was like a
phenomenon that's kind of unexplored, um. I would say
um we started with a different kind of approach.
We started with asking people, uh, single people, uh,
why they were single, um, and while using different
methods like that, interviews, opening questionnaires, uh, uh, posts
on the internet, um, we got like with a,
with a bigger list, like more than 90 regions.
And uh, then, um. In larger samples. We asked
single people to rate these reasons. I mean, why
you are single, this, this reason, the other or
whatever, and using statistical analysis, um we got uh
Uh, we classify this into um three main categories
that sort of I reflect more or less what
I discussed before, so been between relationships um uh
uh uh having difficulties in attracting uh mates and
uh uh um uh um have freedom to do
what you want. So Let me, right, if I
just go through some of this data. So for
instance, the between relationships, uh, category, people would report
that, you know, that between relationships, um, they have
difficulties finding the right one, or they have a
fear that they will get hurt, um. So that
was one category. The other main category was uh
freedom, where people indicate that they want to be
free to do whatever they want to focus on
their career, um, but even to be free to
flirt around, which is kind of a way perhaps
to improve their flirting skills. And um the third
category was a poor capacity to attract mates which
included things like, you know, it's like flirting um
not very, not being very good in flirting, um,
uh, um, having poor looks, having some uh sexual
difficulties, um, um, uh, have some psychological problems and,
you know, in this kind of, these things are
keep people back. So, however, the, the interesting bit
here is that the structure. Um, THE structure of,
of, uh. Of these regions follows this theoretical logic,
right, so it's kind of, that's how it goes.
Now we investigated. Uh, uh, SEX differences, that is,
if you know, just like men and woman would
see differently, we found some. Uh, HOWEVER, in general,
uh, it seems that. The, this, these differences were
not considerable or the, the structure of um of
the regions were very similar between men and and
women. So I would probably say it's kind of
uh uh There are sex differences but not major
ones. I mean, most, I would say this, this,
this regions apply to uh more or less uh
to both sexes. Mhm.
Uh, AND another thing that you've studied is, uh,
related to being able to attract a mate, of
course, is strategies that people use for becoming a
more desirable mate across different cultures. So, first off,
what are the different kinds of strategies that people
employ?
All right. Um, NOW, this was kind of. Or
to be effective in. In, in, in, in Greece.
Um, um. Well, Well employ several strategies to make
them more desirable as mates and could be because
of the mismatch problem. Some people are not very
effective in doing this. So we investigate this could
be like kind of also in a way to
uh to help people, you know, get ideas of
how they improve themselves, um, yeah, in these areas.
Um, SO there are different Strategies in something like
involving like things like improving on uh one's looks
um in um working on uh on their strengths,
uh discussing about their strengths, hiding let's say perhaps
some of undesirable qualities. Um, THIS could go even
further to research we do currently do, uh, that
involves deception. But it's like it's a different things
it's like to present myself. I mean, to, to
highlight my um strengths. um OK, so that's one
strategy, that's one main strategy, but uh uh and
then it goes a step further to lie about
my strengths. So it's like So I, if I'm
well off, I can sort of highlight this. So
that's one strategy of promotion, right? So I kind
of get like a promotion, so I get like
a big car, um, or an expensive car. Uh,
HOWEVER, people um would go a step further and
lie about it, so I'm not that well off,
uh, but I borrow your car which is kind
of uh nice and fancy and I present this
mine, so it's kind of uh. Which kind, I
mean, because this is kind of A reason, uh,
uh, for singlehood because then I present myself to
someone else and if I'm successful. Some women will
fall for this and then they will just come
um but eventually the strategies are sort of this
of this decision are short term. So eventually they
will figure out that I'm not. That wealthy or
whatever, uh, and they will move on to another
relationship, giving rise to, to this between relationship singlehood.
So I mean all these are interrelated. Um, uh,
BUT again, go, go back to your questions kind
of people use different strategies, mainly aiming, um, uh,
to work on their strengths and then highlight their,
the, these trends to perspective, uh, uh, mate, let's
say improving uh their looks, um, but I would
say that. Probably one reason that people are single
is not, is that, are not very effective in
deploying the strategies and one reason they're not very
effective in deploying the strategies is because um uh
of the mismatch problems. So that let's say for
instance we notice in the data that um people,
some people wouldn't um let's say uh. Um, uh,
WORK on their looks, right, which is an important
part in in the free mating context, right, it's
kind of, it's an important strategy of self promotion
and then people just just don't care at all,
um, uh, which has an impact on their, uh,
success in the mating market, um, uh, and why
they don't care at all because, uh, in the
past, um, There was, uh, you know, Sara's marriage
and, uh, where parents let's say would arrange marriages,
they wouldn't care at all about they would care
but not considerably about the looks, let's say of
their perspective, uh, in-laws, right, so this is, this
is, this is not their, their concern, right, it's
kind of um um so if, if this is
not very important then making market, so, uh. So
I don't care about this because it doesn't really
matter how I look, um, my marriage would be
arranged, um, but this has a price now, right?
It's like kind of people, they don't deploy this
strategy of self promotion and the, the looks are
poor because they don't pay attention to this and
this, which it's it's, it's an impediment, um. Uh,
IN finding a, a maintain this cause of like
one of the causes of singlehood. Mhm.
But do these strategies for becoming a more desirable
mate vary across culturally?
Um, WE, uh, uh, we did some cross cultural
reasons, and as usual, there is variation. This variation.
However, I would say is that um uh there's
also considerable consistency in the structure and uh what
people would uh would use. However, there is a
limitation now, Richard, it's kind of, we focus on
contemporary post-industrial societies. So I would say in these
societies, um, paying attention to looks, it's like it
was a consistent strategy found. Um, ACROSS different cultures,
however, I don't know if it's going to be
the same if we go in a pre-industrial context.
So I would say, I would probably say that
there is variation, but there is considerable consistency uh
in post-industrial societies. Um, I, I, I suspect there
will be more variation if you compare uh post-industrial
um and pre-industrial societies. Mhm.
So you've also studied uh the connection between the
fear of relationship, commitment and singlehood. Would you like
to tell us about that?
All right. uh, SO it's. OK, um, I could
say that. All right, so some, my pay. For
people to be single, uh, for some period of
time. So let's say to focus on your strengths,
to, uh, to do different things. How this would
uh materialize that is in your mental accounting so
like It's not always that you would think like
that. It's kind of, you might, this would be
like um reflect on your emotions, so perhaps you
don't feel like being in a relationship or have
a fear. Of being committed into one. SO this
would be one reason why people um have this
fear to keep them away from a relationship for
a while so that uh they can focus on
different things. However, this is again a complex phenomenon,
it has more, more to it, right. So what
happens is that When you get into a relationship.
And it's not a good one, it's not a
fitness increasing. Uh, THIS can cause emotional pain. Which
is good because it's kind of. Your way to
tell you that you have to do something about
it. You either improve the relationship or get out
of it. Um So This Pain has sort of
a a scarring effect that is, it's like a
scar. So when you are out of it, it
sort of helps you um to consider what went
wrong, right, uh so that it, it won't happen
um in the future and to consider what went
wrong and improve it, you might need some time.
So it's kind of this pain keeps like causing
a fear of relationships when you are out of
them. So probably uh this is a way to
keep you outside of the mating market for a
while so you can, you know, improve on what
went wrong, to see what, what went wrong, um,
what I did wrong, um, and improve so it
doesn't happen, uh, to you. Um, SO it comes
from. I would say probably this is the main
reason it's kind of um experience from the relations
might cause like kind of uh some um negative
emotions uh and these negative emotions might cause some
fear of relationships, uh that might keep people away
for a while, which could be a good thing
because, all right, because like if you think about
it, if I'm If I had like a failure,
a relationship failure, it's not very wise to rush
into another one. It's, it's maybe take some time
to think about it. And this fear of getting
into a relationship might help me uh uh for
a while. Um, um. And now for, and that
will be probably sex difference. So this is a
phenomenon complex doesn't have at least one region um
in certain cases, um. Uh, LIKE, like, now there
is the sex difference. So, uh, uh, men would
tend to prefer a casual sex more than woman,
and if you are in a relationship, obviously this
is not what you can do, um, so it
could also be that, uh, uh, men, um, have
this fear of relationship commitment more than woman. Because
you don't want thes don't want to commit, uh,
because which allows them, uh, to have, let's say
casual sex with a different partners. I would think
this is kind of life stages. Dependent, so kind
of, uh, so it's kind of when you are
younger, probably this is more um you don't want
commitment, you have like a fear of commitment, but
Probably this resides as um as you get older
for both uh uh men and women. Uh, SO
it's just like bottom lines that, you know, people
might don't want to commit to have a fear
of relationship which is like a bit complex. I
mean they have like it's a complex phenomenon there
might be many reasons uh for this, but has
also a positive aspect I think that it gives
people some time um away from the mapping market
to better assess what's going on and improve themselves.
So it's not necessarily a bad thing.
OK. So I, I think that we've already talked
a little bit about this, but what are some
of the main advantages and disadvantages that people report
of being single?
All right, um, OK, so, uh, we ask different
people, um, to, to tell us some advantage and
disadvantages, um, so the advantages we discussed before, it's
like I have, uh, freedom, having more freedom to
do what what you want, which makes some sense,
right? So it's kind of, uh, now. Uh, YES,
like I'm married, I talk to my wife, you
know, just go right, I need some time so
I can just talk with Ricardo, uh, and whatever,
right. If I was single, I wouldn't have to,
to buy the reporting to anyone, right? Um, SO
that's, that's I would say it's like frequently people,
uh, report. Another advantage, uh, they report is that
We said this before, but if in some instances
the relationship could be like uh not go very
well, which results in struggles, fights, and negative emotions.
I will talk about this later, uh. Which can
be very nasty or feeling like let's say jealousy
or um uh anger uh uh well, when you
are not in a relationship, well, you don't have
to experience these things, right? Um, um, SO this
is kind of an advantage. However, this brings us
to the disadvantages and the main disadvantage is the
opposite of it. It's kind of people would feel
um lonely. Uh, WILL experience negative emotions like emptiness,
sadness, uh, but mainly lonely, so it can have
an emotional, uh, uh, cost. Why has an emotional
cost? This is not just random. It is for
the evolutionary reason that is, um, if you would
feel satisfied and happy being single, then you wouldn't
bother to get into a relationship, um, uh, so
your, uh, adaptations, your emotional adaptations trigger here, uh,
to punish you. Uh, FOR not, for not doing
something, uh, that promotes, um, uh, your fitness. So
it's kind of They turn your emotional mechanism, turn
singlehood to be. In general, not always, but in
general, an unpleasant experience that is a way to
motivate you to get into a relationship where I
say it's lonely. What I mean is like I
said it's a negative emotion that I want to
get rid of and which motivates me to find
an intimate partner, which is a way to uh
to get rid of it. Um, SO, so in
terms of disadvantages then. Uh, I would say this
is the, like, uh, the main one, we got
here. Plus, of course, we don't have like people
would report that they don't have someone there to
be there for them to, um, uh, to support
them, to discuss their, their problems, um, and this
could be. And an issue because I mean we
are social species, so we just need uh social
input from, from others which discuss our problems with
others and in a contemporary world which tends to
be individualistic, uh, yeah, people sort of um uh
you know, have fewer friends, have to move around,
live on their own, um, uh, which, so we
are facing a problem. Uh, THEY might not have
someone around to talk about it, which makes an
intimate partner even more important than in the past
for this region. I mean, in the past you
had like your uh family around, your cousins, your
parents, your whatever. Now you have nobody. You can
have like Your intimate partner and even if you
don't have this one, then things become even worse.
So it's like kind of, you know, being single
is like kind of uh that's what people would
report that's another reason is like not having someone
to connect um to discuss their issues, their problems.
Mhm. And are there factors that might play a
role in how people deal with the disadvantages of
singlehood? I mean, are there, for example, contexts that
might lead them to more easily discount the disadvantages?
Well, um, we haven't. Investigate this adequately, but I
would say it depends uh on the situation. So
for instance, if you have like, like kind of
as you were saying like the context, you have
like many friends. Um, THIS to some degree could
balance. It won't perfectly balance it, but it will
balance, let's say being, um, uh, being, uh, being
single, right, so it's kind of, uh, also, let's
say, uh, depending on how important is my work,
right, it's like, uh, it's like my career, um,
I like, like people who are career focused I
might not. Take it easier, let's say, than those
who are not. Um, uh, IF you have, let's,
let's say if you live, um, next to your
family would be also important that it's like moving
to to another country and be just on your
own. Uh, SO, so the singlehood there would be
like even more painful, uh, I would think. However,
these are. Uh Hypothesis, I don't have. Data I'll
tell you that this is the case, but I
would just suspect that these are factors um uh
that play a role there. Mhm.
OK, so I guess that I have just one
last topic I would like to ask you about.
We've talked here about what people report as being
the advantages and disadvantages of being single. And what
are the specific benefits of being in a relationship?
What do people have to say about that?
All right. Um, SO, so this is the other
side of the coin, right? It's kind of again,
um. Uh, SO people would think that they don't
have to feel lonely. They might experience positive emotions,
um, like uh love, uh. Sexual satisfaction also appears
to be um uh an important uh region. Um
THEY also have uh someone to be there for
them. So it's kind of, it's like that's the
coin, right? It's kind of, if you, if I
ask about the advantages of being in a relationship,
that people say that I don't have to feel
lonely. uh, THE disadvantage of being single, I have
to feel, I have to experience loneliness. Um, um,
HOWEVER, again, This And also on the case, right,
doesn't mean that all relationships are born equal, right?
So it's kind of, you know, it's like a
from a relationship, you get a lot of support,
satisfaction, sexual satisfaction, positive emotions, uh, uh, but this
might not always be the case. It might be
also the opposite one, right? So it's kind of,
there's no guarantees that these are advantages, um, and
another I would say, uh. Probably an underrated one
that we have to uh look into uh further
is that. Very a long term intimate relationship is
kind of uh provides the context to have a
family, to have children, which kind of be like
for most people. It's very rewarding experience. Um, SO,
and we expect this from evolutionary reasoning, um. So
an intimate relationship, it's not always an end in
itself. It's usually at least in evolution terms, it's
means to a purpose which is to have and
raise children, which means that, well, this has not
been adequately explored, you see it's kind of um
That I would say it's a major benefit that
may not come directly into mind, right? You might
think that OK, I want intimacy, have someone there
for me who have sex or whatever, um, uh,
but eventually sort of you need a relationship to
have, uh, uh, children, um, so if I, if,
if, if I take children out of the equation.
Then, um, I cannot really properly. Assess the benefits
of a relationship, right, because I would say probably
the main one is, you know, to be able
to have a family and then you get a
lot of rewards. From having a family, from having
children, um, but to get these rewards, you have
also to have a relationship, right? So it's kind
of, so these rewards are related to, to this,
it's kind of, you know, I can't just take
children out of the equation and that's something we
currently um investigate.
So uh finally, I would like to ask you
because apparently there's been some debate on this topic
recently. In terms of emotional well-being, is it better
to be single or in a relationship?
OK. Uh, SO for, uh, for your audience, you
might have like if you search online, maybe you,
you had the experience of it. I mean there
is some recent argument saying that, you know, singlehood
is better than. Uh, THAN being in an intimate,
uh, relationship. I mean, as we discussed this before,
I mean you have time to do whatever you
want, um, you can just kind of, uh, develop
yourself, uh, uh, do things and it's kind of,
uh, why bother being in a relationship. Uh, I
would say a lot of these arguments are sort
of misleading, um, because they, um, they lack a
theoretical and empirical basis, uh, and if we follow
the theory. Uh, AS we discussed before, uh, if
you choose to be single, your emotional mechanism will
punish you for this. I mean, they will just
have to, they will motivate you, uh, to get
into one, right, because like it's not fitness, um,
uh, reason to be single. So this makes a
prediction that made people would be happier uh or
enjoy more positive emotions and fewer negative emotions, uh,
uh, than people who are single. So We did
the research to investigate if this is the case,
um, and that's what we found and this was
a cross-cultural uh uh phenomenon that is a cross-cultures
or in general. Uh, NAKED people that's if you
are married or in a relationship, uh, scored higher
in terms of happiness, uh, um, and of positive
emotions, uh, than, and experienced fewer negative emotions than
people who Uh, uh, uh, who are single. Although
the difference was small, so the advantage was small,
uh, although for certain emotions like loneliness, the difference
was considerable, right, so it's kind of you are
single, you experience more, um, loneliness, considering, you are
considered more lonely than if you are in a
relationship. Um, NOW. However, this argument. Uh, DOES not
consider the quality of the relationship because as we
discussed before, some relationships are not fitness increasing. We
expect them emotions to play a role here. So
if your relationship is not fitness increasing, negative emotions
would trigger, um, that would make people take corrective
action, one thing and the relationship and find one
that's uh fitness increasing, or at least more fitness
increasing that would predict then. That it doesn't really
matter. It matters if you are in a relationship
or not, but it matters also in what kind
of a relationship you are. So we extend our
argument and we, we sort of measure uh relationship
quality and we divide people into those who are
uh in a good relationship, in a moderate quality
relationship in a, in a bad relationship. And we
compare these groups with singlehood. And I think this
was like um a very interesting study. Uh, BECAUSE
putting everything together and also in a cross-cultural perspective,
we found the champion of positive emotions of, uh,
um, and that was people in a good relationship.
So in a good quality relationship, these were the
champions, the, the, the experience, um, uh, the most
positive emotions, the highest life satisfaction, uh, and, uh,
the fewest uh negative emotions. Um. The second in
the hierarchy where people are in a moderate quality
uh relationship, um. At the bottom of the hierarchy
were people in a poor quality relationship. So you
see how important this is like it's kind of
um uh and so bottom was like the champions
of negative emotions uh where uh people in a
poor quality relationship and then very closely followed that
those who are involuntarily single. Um, SO, and what
like then what people between, um, uh, relationships and
uh voluntaryrily singles. So I mean if you see
the hierarchy then it's kind as we expect from
evolutionary reasoning, um. The champions of positive emotions are
people in a good relationship and the champions of
uh of bad emotions are people in a bad
relationship followed closely by uh those who are involuntarily
single. Which has like kind of, it's important for
this debate and that. Well, in general, you are
better off in a relationship, but you have to
be very careful what this relationship is. So I
mean in practical terms, I mean for your audience,
people shouldn't just strive to get into uh any
relationship, but if they manage to get into a
good one, that will make a big difference, which
is a kind of way saying that for singlehood
is good for some time because to find the
proper one. You have to develop your strengths, you
have to wait. All right, good things come to
those who wait. You know, have to, you have
to wait a bit. It's kind of, you know,
you shouldn't be near us because if you are
near us, uh, you make a wrong choice and
then you get into a bad relationship, you know,
you are worse off than single. So this is
kind of this, this, this kind of research has
practical um uh um uh applications. I mean, but
that's what I mean psychologists shouldn't be also just
theory, um, uh, so bottom line, it's, it's. I,
as we expect. Single who has an impact on
emotional well-being or how uh well you feel uh
uh but also the quality of the relationship is
important or even more important uh than this. OK.
OK, so basically, the simple answer to the question
is that a good relationship is better than being
single, but being single is better than being in
a bad relationship,
right? I would say this, I would say, I
would say so. So people, but I would say
it's kind of, you shouldn't. Going to like a
Hollywood kind of uh approach, you know, it's like
seeing the perfect relationship or whatever because even moderate
quality relationship uh is the next in the hierarchy,
so it's kind of I would say people should
strive to get like into a good or a
decent relationship, uh, let's say because there are no
perfect relationships by the end of the day, right?
It's kind of, uh, uh, uh, unless you watch
a lot of movies, there's like kind of there
are no perfect relationship, all right.
OK, great. So would you like to tell them
people where they can find your work on the
internet? Right,
so I just upload my papers um online on
my website Manillashapostolo.com or Resgate, um, so they can.
Uh, HAVE a look there. So it's kind of
like, um, uh, upload papers there if um someone
is interested in a paper that, uh, they face
a difficulty accessing, they can just even email me.
I will be happy to, uh, to send them
a copy.
Great. So, Luke, thank you so much for coming
on the show again. It's always a pleasure to
talk to you.
Thank you very much for inviting me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labran Juarsent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark
Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan Wilson,
asilla dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punter Darusmani
Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman
Sam of Zalliriei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus
Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fitim Duffyani Smith Jen Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson,
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow
atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael
Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu,
Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon,
Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis,
Kate van Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud
Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers. These are Webb, Jim,
Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict
Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo
Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.